Install Fluent Operator (#7568)
gardener/gardener: docs/extensions/logging-and-monitoring.md

Gardener provides an integrated logging and monitoring stack for alerting, monitoring, and troubleshooting of its managed components by operators or end users. For further information how to make use of it in these roles, refer to the corresponding guides for [exploring logs](https://github.com/gardener/logging/tree/master/docs/usage/README.md) and for [monitoring with Grafana](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/getting-started/getting-started/#all-users).

> The components that constitute the logging and monitoring stack are managed by Gardener. By default, it deploys [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/), [Alertmanager](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/alertmanager/) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) into the `garden` namespace of all seed clusters. If the `Logging` [feature gate](../deployment/feature_gates.md) in the `gardenlet` configuration is enabled, it will deploy [fluent-operator](https://github.com/fluent/fluent-operator) and [Loki](https://grafana.com/oss/loki/) in the `garden` namespace too.

Reviewer: Nit: the comma in the below diff is added by @n-boshnakov in https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/7394. Let's do not revert his change.

```suggestion
The components that constitute the logging and monitoring stack are managed by Gardener. By default, it deploys [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/), [Alertmanager](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/alertmanager/), and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) into the `garden` namespace of all seed clusters. If the `Logging` [feature gate](../deployment/feature_gates.md) in the `gardenlet` configuration is enabled, it will deploy [fluent-operator](https://github.com/fluent/fluent-operator) and [Loki](https://grafana.com/oss/loki/) in the `garden` namespace too.
```

> The components that constitute the logging and monitoring stack are managed by Gardener. By default, it deploys [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/), [Alertmanager](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/alertmanager/) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) into the `garden` namespace of all seed clusters. If the `Logging` [feature gate](../deployment/feature_gates.md) in the `gardenlet` configuration is enabled, it will deploy [fluent-operator](https://github.com/fluent/fluent-operator) and [Loki](https://grafana.com/oss/loki/) in the `garden` namespace too.

Reviewer: The logging is no longer a feature gate, hence I created https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/7575.

!["Cluster Logging Topology"](../usage/images/logging-architecture.png "Cluster Logging Topology")

Gardener logging consists of components in three roles - log collectors and forwarders, log persistency and exploration/consumption interfaces. All of them live in the seed clusters in multiple instances:

> - Logs are persisted by Loki instances deployed as StatefulSets - one per shoot namespace, if the logging is enabled in the `gardenlet` configuration (`logging.enabled`) and the [shoot purpose](../usage/shoot_purposes.md#behavioral-differences) is not `testing`, and one in the `garden` namespace. The shoot instances store logs from the control plane components hosted there. The `garden` Loki instance is responsible for logs from the rest of the seed namespaces - `kube-system`, `garden` `extension-*` and others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Logs are persisted by Loki instances deployed as StatefulSets - one per shoot namespace, if the logging is enabled in the `gardenlet` configuration (`logging.enabled`) and the [shoot purpose](../usage/shoot_purposes.md#behavioral-differences) is not `testing`, and one in the `garden` namespace. The shoot instances store logs from the control plane components hosted there. The `garden` Loki instance is responsible for logs from the rest of the seed namespaces - `kube-system`, `garden`, `extension-*`, and others.
```

Changes initially done by @n-boshnakov in https://github.com/gardener/gardener/commit/1215dc6ac9f3741d245d0659f36a700f179c8814#diff-93972179f36fa195b948f0f4979acab75697f99f3c51ab889994d9d8ba9f170b.

- Fluent-bit DaemonSets deployed by the fluent-operator on each seed node collect logs from it. A custom plugin takes care to distribute the collected log messages to the Loki instances that they are intended for. This allows to fetch the logs once for the whole cluster, and to distribute them afterwards.

> - Grafana is the UI component used to explore monitoring and log data together for easier troubleshooting and in context. Grafana instances are configured to use the coresponding Loki instances, sharing the same namespace, as data providers. There is one Grafana Deployment in the `garden` namespace and two Deployments per shoot namespace (one exposed to the end users and one for the operators). 

Reviewer: Nit: `coresponding` typo fix done by @n-boshnakov in https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/7394. Let's do not revert his change. And there is also single grafana in the Shoot namespace. You can pay more attention when doing rebase, otherwise you are reverting other people's changes.

```suggestion
- Grafana is the UI component used to explore monitoring and log data together for easier troubleshooting and in context. Grafana instances are configured to use the coresponding Loki instances, sharing the same namespace, as data providers. There is one Grafana Deployment in the `garden` namespace and one Deployment per shoot namespace (exposed to the end users and to the operators).
```

> - Grafana is the UI component used to explore monitoring and log data together for easier troubleshooting and in context. Grafana instances are configured to use the coresponding Loki instances, sharing the same namespace, as data providers. There is one Grafana Deployment in the `garden` namespace and one Deployment per shoot namespace (exposed to the end users and to the operators).

Reviewer: Nit (I assume rebase gone wrong)

```suggestion
- Grafana is the UI component used to explore monitoring and log data together for easier troubleshooting and in context. Grafana instances are configured to use the corresponding Loki instances, sharing the same namespace as data providers. There is one Grafana Deployment in the `garden` namespace and one Deployment per shoot namespace (exposed to the end users and to the operators).
```

> - Grafana is the UI component used to explore monitoring and log data together for easier troubleshooting and in context. Grafana instances are configured to use the corresponding Loki instances, sharing the same namespace, as data providers. There is one Grafana Deployment in the `garden` namespace and one Deployment per shoot namespace (exposed to the end users and to the operators).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Grafana is the UI component used to explore monitoring and log data together for easier troubleshooting and in context. Grafana instances are configured to use the corresponding Loki instances, sharing the same namespace as data providers. There is one Grafana Deployment in the `garden` namespace and one Deployment per shoot namespace (exposed to the end users and to the operators).
```

A change initially done in https://github.com/gardener/gardener/commit/1215dc6ac9f3741d245d0659f36a700f179c8814#diff-93972179f36fa195b948f0f4979acab75697f99f3c51ab889994d9d8ba9f170b

Logs can be produced from various sources, such as containers or systemd, and in different formats. The fluent-bit design supports configurable [data pipeline](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/concepts/data-pipeline) to address that problem. Gardener provides such [configuration](../../pkg/operation/botanist/component/kubeapiserver/logging.go) for logs produced by all its core managed components as `ClusterFilters` and `ClusterParsers` . Extensions can contribute their own, specific configurations as fluent-operator custom resources too. See for example the [logging configuration](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-provider-aws/blob/master/charts/gardener-extension-provider-aws/templates/clusterfilters-logging.yaml) for the Gardener AWS provider extension.

> #### Fluent-bit log parsers and filters 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Fluent-bit log parsers and filters
```

> #### Fluent-bit log parsers and filters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Fluent-bit Log Parsers and Filters 
```

See https://github.com/gardener/gardener/commit/1215dc6ac9f3741d245d0659f36a700f179c8814#diff-93972179f36fa195b948f0f4979acab75697f99f3c51ab889994d9d8ba9f170b

> To integrate with Gardener logging, extensions can and *should* specify how fluent-bit will handle the logs produced by the managed components that they contribute to Gardener. Normally, that would require to configure a *parser* for the specific logging format, if none of the available is applicable, and a *filter* defining how to apply it. For a complete reference for the configuration options, refer to fluent-bit's [documentation](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/).   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To integrate with Gardener logging, extensions can and *should* specify how fluent-bit will handle the logs produced by the managed components that they contribute to Gardener. Normally, that would require to configure a *parser* for the specific logging format, if none of the available is applicable, and a *filter* defining how to apply it. For a complete reference for the configuration options, refer to fluent-bit's [documentation](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/).
```

> To contribute its own configuration to the fluent-bit agents data pipelines, an extension must provide it as a `fluent-operator` custom resource labeled `fluentbit.gardener/type: seed` and deployed in the seed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To contribute its own configuration to the fluent-bit agents data pipelines, an extension must deploy a `fluent-operator` custom resource labeled with `fluentbit.gardener/type: seed` in the seed cluster.
```

> **Note:** Take care to provide the correct data pipeline elements in the coresponding fields and not to mix them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** Take care to provide the correct data pipeline elements in the corresponding fields and not to mix them.
```

See https://github.com/gardener/gardener/commit/1215dc6ac9f3741d245d0659f36a700f179c8814#diff-93972179f36fa195b948f0f4979acab75697f99f3c51ab889994d9d8ba9f170b

> **Example:** Logging configuration for provider-specific (OpenStack) worker controller deploying a `machine-controller-manager` component into a shoot namespace that reuses the `kube-apiserver-parser` defined in [logging.go](../../pkg/operation/botanist/component/kubeapiserver/logging.go) to parse the component logs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Example:** Logging configuration for provider-specific (OpenStack) worker controller deploying a `machine-controller-manager` component into a shoot namespace that reuses the `kube-apiserver-parser` defined in [logging.go](../../pkg/operation/botanist/component/kubeapiserver/logging.go) to parse the component logs:
```

**Example:** In this example we configure fluent-bit when it finds a log with field `tag`, which matches the `Condition`, to add `__gardener_multitenant_id__=operator;user` into the log record.

```yaml
apiVersion: fluentbit.fluent.io/v1alpha2
kind: ClusterFilter
metadata:
  labels:
    fluentbit.gardener/type: "seed"
  name: modify-provider-aws
spec:
  filters:
  - modify:
      conditions:
        - keyValueMatches:
            tag: ^kubernetes\.var\.log\.containers\.(cloud-controller-manager-.+?_.+?_aws-cloud-controller-manager|csi-driver-controller-.+?_.+?_aws-csi)
      rules:
        - add:

>             __gardener_multitenant_id__: operator;user

Reviewer: The tenant story should be already removed with https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/7523. I guess you have to rebase.

## Tips

- Be careful to create `ClusterFilters` and `ClusterParsers` with unique names because they are not namespaced. We use `pod_name` for filters with one container and `pod_name--container_name` for pods with multiple containers.

> - Be careful to match exactly the log names that you need for a particular parser in your filters configuration. The regular expression you will supply will match names in the form `kubernetes.pod_name.<metadata>.container_name`. If there are extensions with the same container and pod names, they will all match the same parser in a filter. That may be a desired effect, if they all share the same log format. But it will be a problem if they don't. To solve it, either the pod or container names must be unique, and the regular expression in the filter has to match that unique pattern. A recommended approach is to prefix containers with the extension name and tune the regular expression to match it. For example, using `myextension-container` as container name, and a regular expression `kubernetes.mypod.*myextension-container` will guarantee match of the right log name. Make sure that the regular expression does not match more than you expect. For example, `kubernetes.systemd.*systemd.*` will match both `systemd-service` and `systemd-monitor-service`. You will want to be as specific as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Be careful to match exactly the log names that you need for a particular parser in your filters configuration. The regular expression you will supply will match names in the form `kubernetes.pod_name.<metadata>.container_name`. If there are extensions with the same container and pod names, they will all match the same parser in a filter. That may be a desired effect, if they all share the same log format. But it will be a problem if they don't. To solve it, either the pod or container names must be unique, and the regular expression in the filter has to match that unique pattern. A recommended approach is to prefix containers with the extension name and tune the regular expression to match it. For example, using `myextension-container` as container name and a regular expression `kubernetes.mypod.*myextension-container` will guarantee match of the right log name. Make sure that the regular expression does not match more than you expect. For example, `kubernetes.systemd.*systemd.*` will match both `systemd-service` and `systemd-monitor-service`. You will want to be as specific as possible.
```

See https://github.com/gardener/gardener/commit/1215dc6ac9f3741d245d0659f36a700f179c8814
